CHOICESCRIPT LICENSE (CSL) v1.0

Non-commercial usage and modification of the works is permitted
provided that (1) the ChoiceScript license is retained with the works,
so that any entity that uses the works is notified of this license,
and (2) the user grants at no charge an unrestricted, transferrable,
non-exclusive license to Dan Fabulich and Adam Morse for any
modifications, if any, made to the ChoiceScript interpreter.  The user
may not use the ChoiceScript interpreter or code written for use with
the ChoiceScript interpreter for any commercial purposes, including
sales of complete applications, use of the code to generate
advertising revenue, or any other commercial purpose.  If you are
interested in a commercial license, please contact
support@choiceofgames.com.

DISCLAIMER

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, the
licensor provides the work on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR
CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied, including, without
limitation, any warranties or conditions of TITLE, NON-INFRINGEMENT,
MERCHANTABILITY, or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. You are solely
responsible for determining the appropriateness of using or
redistributing the works and assume any risks associated with your
exercise of permissions under this license.

In no event and under no legal theory, whether in tort (including
negligence), contract, or otherwise, unless required by applicable law
(such as deliberate and grossly negligent acts) or agreed to in
writing, shall the licensor be liable to you for damages, including
any direct, indirect, special, incidental, or consequential damages of
any character arising as a result of this license or out of the use or
inability to use the works (including but not limited to damages for
loss of goodwill, work stoppage, computer failure or malfunction, or
any and all other commercial damages or losses), even if the licensor
has been advised of the possibility of such damages.